+++
title = "The biodiversity of the Mediterranean Sea: Estimates, patterns, and threats"
date = 2010-01-01
authors = ["Marta Coll", "Chiara Piroddi", "Jeroen Steenbeek", "Kristin Kaschner", "Frida Ben Rais Lasram", "Jacopo Aguzzi", "Enric Ballesteros", "Carlo Nike Bianchi", "Jordi Corbera", "Thanos Dailianis", "Roberto Danovaro", "Marta Estrada", "Carlo Froglia", "Bella S. Galil", "Josep M. Gasol", "Ruthy Gertwage", "João Gil", "François Guilhaumon", "Kathleen Kesner-Reyes", "Miltiadis Spyridon Kitsos", "Athanasios Koukouras", "Nikolaos Lampadariou", "Elijah Laxamana", "Carlos M.López Fé de la Cuadra", "Heike K. Lotze", "Daniel Martin", "Dšavid Mouillot", "Daniel Oro", "Saša Raicevich", "Josephine Rius-Barile", "Jose Ignacio Saiz-Salinas", "Carles San Vicente", "Samuel Somot", "José Templado", "Xavier Turon", "Dimitris Vafidis", "Roger Villanueva", "Eleni Voultsiadou"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "textlessptextgreaterThe Mediterranean Sea is a marine biodiversity hot spot. Here we combined an extensive literature analysis with expert opinions to update publicly available estimates of major taxa in this marine ecosystem and to revise and update several species lists. We also assessed overall spatial and temporal patterns of species diversity and identified major changes and threats. Our results listed approximately 17,000 marine species occurring in the Mediterranean Sea. However, our estimates of marine diversity are still incomplete as yet—undescribed species will be added in the future. Diversity for microbes is substantially underestimated, and the deep-sea areas and portions of the southern and eastern region are still poorly known. In addition, the invasion of alien species is a crucial factor that will continue to change the biodiversity of the Mediterranean, mainly in its eastern basin that can spread rapidly northwards and westwards due to the warming of the Mediterranean Sea. Spatial patterns showed a general decrease in biodiversity from northwestern to southeastern regions following a gradient of production, with some exceptions and caution due to gaps in our knowledge of the biota along the southern and eastern rims. Biodiversity was also generally higher in coastal areas and continental shelves, and decreases with depth. Temporal trends indicated that overexploitation and habitat loss have been the main human drivers of historical changes in biodiversity. At present, habitat loss and degradation, followed by fishing impacts, pollution, climate change, eutrophication, and the establishment of alien species are the most important threats and affect the greatest number of taxonomic groups. All these impacts are expected to grow in importance in the future, especially climate change and habitat degradation. The spatial identification of hot spots highlighted the ecological importance of most of the western Mediterranean shelves (and in particular, the Strait of Gibraltar and the adjacent Alboran Sea), western African coast, the Adriatic, and the Aegean Sea, which show high concentrations of endangered, threatened, or vulnerable species. The Levantine Basin, severely impacted by the invasion of species, is endangered as well.textless/ptextgreater textlessptextgreaterThis abstract has been translated to other languages (textlessxref ref-type=\"supplementary-material\" rid=\"pone.0011842.s001\"textgreaterFile S1textless/xreftextgreater).textless/ptextgreater"
selected = "false"
publication = "*PLoS ONE*"
doi = "10.1371/journal.pone.0011842"
+++

